Project, Part 3
CS 4341 Spring 2026
Due: Friday, April 17th, 11:59 pm
Instructions:
This assignment is a Cohort Assignment. While everyone may work together and share information,
each member of the cohort must submit their own copy of the project.
Products:
To that end, certain phases must be completed. This phase consists of
• Quiz Work, 30 points
• Cohort Final, 5 points
• Project Description Final, 5 points
• System Design Final, 10 points
• Program, 35 points
• Output, 15 points
• Citations, Required
Notes on Grading
This project phase is graded based on the following results
• Quiz Work is a set of sample problem for the cohort to work on and is practice for the exams. To
increase participation on the sample problems, these will be done as a series of short quizzes
during the in-class Cohort Time.
• Documents: All documents are submitted. If a document is not submitted or is unreadable, then full
points are deducted. If the documents are confusing, badly spelled, or badly drawn, 2 points will be
deducted for each time the grader is confused.
• Programming: The program portion must be correct, and the instructions followed. Students in the past
have turned in working code…that did not follow the directions. Full points will be deducted if the
code is incorrect, even if the output is correct.
• Use of AI
o Personal Note: AI systems are not guaranteed to generate the correct answer.
o AI may be used but will be considered just another software package, and AI systems
must be included in the citations.
o If the cohort turns in the incorrect answer, that is the responsibility of the cohort, not the
AI. You cannot gain points back by saying the AI was responsible.
• Citations: If the cohort uses software to solve problems, which includes current artificial intelligence,
then that software must be cited. Other software includes Logisim, Circuitverse, and Digital I/O. A
cohort using software to check their work is not wrong.
• Example Software Citations:
o OpenAI. 2023. ChatGPT (Mar 7 version) [Large language model]. https://chat.openai.com/chat
o CircuitVerse. 2026. Online Digital Logic Circuit Simulator. https://circuitverse.org/ 
Quiz Work (30 points)
Between now and the end of the semester, some of the cohort times will be replaced by in-class,
group assignments. This material will be drawn from Chapter 7 Memory, Chapter 8 RTL, and
possibly Chapter 15 Timing Constraints and Chapter 21 Pipelining.
Cohort Final (5 points)
For the term project, students are to join a cohort of one or more students to work on the project.
Confirm the Cohort name and Cohort members
Include the name of the cohort and a list of its members. This will be an updated version of the cohort
description from part 2 of the project. Since this is the final form, there are no blue font or strikethrough
font, only the final form of the project.
This document must include.
• The date of the document.
• The cohort’s name and description:
• A list of cohort members.
What to turn in:
Turn in a single PDF <CohortName>.Charter.Final.pdf containing the final form of the cohort.:
Project Description Final ( 5 points)
Confirm the Project Description
Describe the project that is being turned in by the Cohort. The project description needs to be at least one
paragraph long describing what the cohort has built for this semester. This description might not have
changed over the course of the semester. Since this is the final form, there are no blue font or strikethrough
font.
What to turn in
Turn in a single PDF <CohortName>.ProjectDescription.Final.pdf containing the final project
description.
System Design Final (10 points)
The System Design document needs to be finalized for part 3. Since this is the final form, there are no blue
font or strikethrough font.
The system design document consists of the following sections.
• Component Diagram: A circuit diagram showing the major components in the breadboard module.
• Parts List: A list of the modules instantiated in the breadboard module.
• An Input List, which shows the lines of information coming into the breadboard module.
• An Output List that shows the lines of information going out of the breadboard module.
• An Interface List, which shows the lines of information going between components, represented
by local variables in the breadboard module.
• An Opcode Table, a set of commands that make the system change. These are a list of the input
variables to the breadboard module and includes a description of what each opcode makes the
system perform.
Each section should include at the minimum of a one-sentence description of a component or line in
the system. This System Design Final will be used to check the code against the project description.
Every time something does not match, it will be a 2-point deduction. 
Programming (35 points)
The Programming portion of the program is the second sprint of this project. The program must be a
testbench with the stimulus (the main of the program), have a breadboard module that matches the
component diagram from the system design, and all other components, (gates, counters, mathematics,
controllers, multiplexors, decoders, encoders, comparators) must be modules instantiated in the
breadboard module.
Modules that are considered overcomplex (example, Long Division) may be done with behavioral
coding, such as loops and if-statements. Modules that are addition, subtraction, logic gates,
multiplexers, decoders, and standard components should be done as structural codes, utilizing gates
and concatenations and arrays to perform the functions.
COMPLEXITY
The projects must be as complex as an ALU. An ALU has a 32-bit memory register, a 16-bit
feedback loop, and sixteen op-codes representing 16 operations. Math and logic operations are
represented by having additional Verilog modules, which also include error codes and status
messages to be routed to the output.
Memory systems should be registers made of D Flip-Flops (DFF). An ALU would have a single
accumulator register, but have 12 to 16 opcodes. A lightsaber controller would have a register for the
blade color, blade length, number of blades, additional registers for other blades. (“Hey, six bladed
light saber! 24 registers!”) but could have fewer opcodes.
Most importantly, the breadboard module must match the Component Diagram in the System Design.
The components in the breadboard module must be their own modules.
Output (15 points)
The stimulus in the testbench must demonstrate the opcodes and their components. An ALU would
have to show the ability to solve multiple math equations by accepting a series of instructions and clock
pulses over the course of the stimulus. Perhaps demonstrating the area of a circle, the surface area of
a cone, and the volume of a sphere. A lightsaber would need to be able to switch each blade on, adjust
the length of each blade, and adjust the color of each blade, and be able to switch the blades off. A
single traffic light is not much of a problem, but a stimulus and breadboard that had four traffic lights
guarding an intersection would be at least 3 states (red, yellow, green) for four cases. (north, south, east
west). A rover or drone would have to receive instructions to start movement, travel some distance, and
perform a task. The opcodes in the System Design would be checked against the commands used in
the output. 